[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>SEAN OLAOIRE:
Reincarnation is probably
the most important element
in the trajectory of a soul
in its learning to grow.
You can't be prejudiced if
you subscribe to reincarnation
and you realize that
whatever position I'm
in now as a white,
Irish male, I've
been in all of the
other configurations
in past lifetimes.
So to be prejudiced against
anybody in any configuration
is absolutely meaningless.
And Moses is probably the
most important liberator
that never existed.
He has influenced more people
to strive for their freedom
than any character in history.
And that's the
purpose of the story.
It's not about facts,
factual history.
It's about creating a
hero who can help them
in present
difficulties to survive
what they're going through.
Life is a game that
God is playing.
I sometimes say that life is a
dream that the ego is having,
and the ego is a dream
that the soul is having,
and the soul is a dream
that spirit is having,
and spirit is a dream
that source is having.
So we live within nested dreams,
and it's God dreaming this.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: It's going
to be a wonderfully wild ride.
The back cover of father
Sean Olaoire's book,
"Setting God Free," begins
with "A priest, a scientist,
and a psychologist
walk into a bar."
The upshot is that he
is a Catholic priest,
a psychologist, and a scientist.
And the place he's come to
resonates very deeply for me.
For one, the God
the Old Testament
may not be the jealous
and angry entity
the Old Testament
depicts, rather,
the shadow side of ourselves,
the people who wrote the Bible.
Sean, welcome so much.
I've been with you before.
I've had on my other show.
And I'm just so, I think,
enchanted with not only
the depth of your
knowledge, because we're
going to explain why you
have such depth of knowledge
in a moment, but also your
ability to tell stories.
And that's because you're
a natural storyteller.
And I call you The Druid.
When anyone hears
me talk about you,
I say, oh, yeah,
the druid's coming.
So first of all, Sean, welcome.
>>OLAOIRE: Thanks a million.
>>REGINA: And let's talk
about your own background
growing up in Ireland and being
the eldest son of an eldest
son of an eldest son,
and how Grandfather Jim
came into your life.
>>OLAOIRE: OK.
So I'm the firstborn
of my parents,
and both parents
are the firstborns
in their own families.
So I was actually raised by my
grandparents for the first six
years because my father was
the eldest of his family
and his youngest brother,
Noel, who is my uncle,
is two months younger than me.
So I was born in
October 1946, and he
was born in December 1946.
So my grandmother
wanted a companion
for her youngest child,
so she persuaded my mother
to give me up temporarily.
The temporary lasted
for six years.
And so I lived with my
grandparents, my father's
parents, and my
great grandmother,
whom I called Muddy, for the
first six years of my life.
And then, subsequently, I lived
with the other grandparents,
where I met Daddy Jim.
So Muddy, my great grandmother,
was like a Christian mystic.
For her, Mother
Mary was more real
than you are to me
right now, Regina.
So she would talk out
loud to Mother Mary
and I'd be privy to
these conversations.
And then from age six until for
the next four or five years,
I lived with my
grandfather, Daddy Jim,
who was a druid, a great
fiddler, a great organist--
played the concert flute, the
tin whistle, the clarinet,
the squeeze box.
And he was a great
storyteller, so he filled me up
with all the old
Irish mythology.
So between the
two of them, I got
this great
cross-fertilization of kind
of mystical Christianity
and Druidical
mythology from ancient Ireland.
So that was kind of the
background for the first 10
years.
>>REGINA: And so you're a
natural born storyteller.
>>OLAOIRE: I love
telling stories.
>>REGINA: And you do.
You tell them so well.
OK.
So you decided at some point
to become a Catholic priest.
OK, let's talk about that
journey all the way to Africa.
>>OLAOIRE: So at age 18,
I entered the seminary,
and I was actually really
embarrassed about it
because it was a real school.
I was good in school, but I
was really good at athletics,
and I was really embarrassed
about going to the seminary.
It sounds like
wussy thing to do.
But I knew I needed to it--
>>REGINA: It's like what you
do if you can't do sports.
You go into the seminary.
>>OLAOIRE: Exactly.
So I didn't even tell
my parents that I
was joining the priesthood.
So I come from a
fairly poor family.
So I needed to do a
full physical in order
to qualify to be
accepted in the seminary.
And so, I go to my
mother one day and I say,
I need 10 shillings.
And 10 shillings
is like, maybe, $6.
And she said, what do you
need 10 shillings for?
I said, I need to
go to the doctor.
What's wrong with you?
There's nothing wrong with me.
Why are you going to
the doctor if there's
nothing wrong with you?
I need to do a full physical.
Why are you doing
a full physical?
Because I'm going to go to the
seminary in three months time.
So that was the
first I brought it--
>>REGINA: The first-- [CHUCKLES]
>>OLAOIRE: So I went to the
seminary, then, at age 18.
And part of the
seminary training
was to attend the National
University of Ireland.
So I did a Bachelor of Science
degree and a double major
in pure mathematics and
mathematical physics.
And then in the seminary, I
studied philosophy, theology,
scripture, and
community development.
I spent eight years
there, and then at age 26,
I was released on Africa.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHING] You
were released on Africa.
Now why did you decide
to go on a mission
rather than staying in Ireland?
>>OLAOIRE: Exactly.
I knew I didn't want to
be a priest in Ireland
for some reason.
I was fascinated with
the sense of adventure.
I wanted to live in
kind of exciting places,
in very, very
primitive conditions,
which Africa was at that stage.
So, talking about 1964
when I joined the seminary.
And so I wanted to
be in a kind of a--
I wanted to live in the jungle,
or in the desert, or a place
where there was
wildlife and where
people hadn't heard of Christ.
And I was going to kind
of save these lost souls
and bring them to
heaven with me.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: [LAUGHING] How naive.
>>OLAOIRE: Very naive.
>>REGINA: So how
long did that last?
So here you are 26,
you end up in Africa.
>>OLAOIRE: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK, you were in Kenya.
>>OLAOIRE: In Kenya, yeah.
>>REGINA: You were in Kenya.
And you're there to convert
the Native people, right?
>>OLAOIRE: Right.
>>REGINA: How'd that go?
>>OLAOIRE: Well,
it's very interesting
because I'm always fascinated
by folklore and mythology
and proverbs.
And actually, in
fact, the second
to last year in high
school between my junior
and senior years, I spent
the three months vacation
in a place in Ireland,
a little village
called [IRISH],, which Irish
is the Native language there.
And I was collecting proverbs
from the old people there,
and I collected 432 Proverbs.
And one of the things
an old man said to me,
he said, if Christianity
had never come to Ireland,
we could live according
to the proverbs.
And he was absolutely right.
>>REGINA: The native proverbs.
>>OLAOIRE: The native proverbs.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>OLAOIRE: Because the
archived wisdom of a culture
is their stories,
proverbs, and mythology.
And so if you
really want to know
the wisdom of any group of
people, look at their proverbs.
The proverbs are like, the
distillation of the stories,
so the stories can be epics,
taking days even to tell.
But the proverbs are
the distillation.
And so as soon as I hit
Kenya and I began to learn--
I had the privilege of learning
for different Kenyan languages
and delving into the mythology
of peoples I worked with--
I began to realize
as I collected
the proverbs of
Kenya, that I could
say the same thing about Kenya.
That if Christianity
had never come to Kenya,
they could live according
to the proverbs.
So that was a real kind
[NON-ENGLISH] for me, a 180,
a realization that my job
was not to convert Africa
to Christianity, it was to
cross-fertilize different
wisdom traditions.
And so I became what
Camus would subsequently
call a Gnostic
intermediary, somebody
who is well-versed in two
very different systems
and cross fertilize them
to their mutual benefit.
So that I saw was
my job, to learn
the mythology, the language,
the folklore, the proverbs,
and to share the wisdom
of my Catholic upbringing
with them, so that
we could develop
a kind of a hybrid in
which people could create
a cosmology drawing on very
many different wisdom traditions
instead of being just narrowly
focused on a single tradition.
>>REGINA: So just
to distill it down,
what do you feel you
brought that best
served the public there?
And what did they bring to
you that best served you
in the expansion of knowledge?
>>OLAOIRE: Well,
it's interesting.
In fairness to the missionary
endeavor in general,
it wasn't just about converting
people to Christianity.
Catholic missionaries
particularly
were very, very involved in
agriculture, in medicine,
in education, in famine
relief, in water production.
So I was involved
in all those areas
and really trying to
ameliorate the living
conditions under which
most people live there.
And so Christianity was part
of the package in a sense,
but it wasn't the main thrust
in any sense of the word.
So what I was bringing was--
>>REGINA: It was
really humanitarian.
>>OLAOIRE: Very much so.
So I was bringing a possibility
of improving life, improving
longevity, saving little
children from dying very, very
early, as well as
the wisdom tradition
that I was brought up in.
What they taught me was Africa
has this extraordinary ability
to laugh at life.
And they have this
extraordinary self-confidence.
I have never in my life met an
African with a poor self-image,
unless they were trained by
Europeans, unless they went
through a European education
system, in which they were
taught to kind of self-doubt.
But I've never met an
African who wasn't--
you could ask him anything,
can you do x, absolutely.
Can you film this?
Absolutely.
Can you can fix a car?
They never say no.
They're willing
to give it a shot.
So there's a supreme
self-confidence--
>>REGINA: That's beautiful.
>>OLAOIRE: --as
well as self-esteem.
So I learned that.
Also, literally
their family values,
that family is really,
really important
in Africa and the
ability to survive
in all kinds of circumstances.
For a long time, I
was running a hostel
for physically disabled
children, mainly polio kids.
And I never heard
any one of these kids
ever complain about
their circumstances.
In fact, we had a soccer
team, and these kids
were using crutches,
running around the field,
trying to kick a soccer ball.
And one little kid was
on his hands and knees,
walking on his hands
and knees, and trying
to head the ball in the ground.
And so they would
never complain.
So the ability, the
extraordinary ability
to survive, whatever
vicissitude life threw at them,
and to laugh through it.
Yeah, so I learned all
those things from Africa.
>>REGINA: We are far
from that plumb line.
That's been educated
right out of us.
>>OLAOIRE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Another thing
you learned, and I've
learned from previous
conversations with you,
is about the whole notion of
reincarnation, which was not
something at the time that
you necessarily gave weight to
as a Catholic priest.
And this comes up in
your life as turning out
to be rather important.
[LAUGHING]
Because you turn into
essentially a renegade
or rebel.
>>OLAOIRE: Yes, very much so.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about how
that happened before we start
going into your book, which
is just amazing.
So how did you learn
about reincarnation
through the Africans?
>>OLAOIRE: So the
people that I lived--
I lived with three different
Kalenjin tribes, that Kipsigis,
the Tugen, the Nandi.
And all of them had
this fascinating system
where a child was given three
different names at birth.
The first name had to do with
the circumstances of the birth.
So if I asked a child, for
instance, [NON-ENGLISH],,
what is your name, and she
says to me, [NON-ENGLISH],,
I knew immediately she
was born during a famine,
just by the name.
If I asked a little
boy, [NON-ENGLISH],,
what is your name, and he
said to me [NON-ENGLISH],,
I knew immediately that there
was a lot of problems around
the birth and that people
were fussing about,
that it was a dangerous time.
So the circumstances
of the birth
were the first thing
that was given.
So I knew immediately
the circumstances.
The second name was called
the [NON-ENGLISH] name,
[NON-ENGLISH],, and it was the
name that only the mother could
use of the child.
And if the child was
being obstreperous,
the mother would
use a special name,
and the child would
immediately quiet down.
I saw warriors come back
from cattle raids, you know,
fired up at the battle
of a cattle safari,
and the mother would use
the [NON-ENGLISH] name,
and the boy would
quiet down immediately.
That was the second name.
And the third name, they
would bring an elder
from the tribe to name
all of the ancestors
of this particular baby.
And when the baby
sneezed, they said, ah,
that's the ancestor
who is coming back.
So they're recycling,
they're coming back.
And so I thought this was
just a really interesting,
quaint custom.
>>REGINA: Yes.
But it ended up taking on
more meaning than that.
>>OLAOIRE: Much deeper meaning.
I came to the States in 1987
to pursue a PhD in psychology.
And early on, I did a
seminar with a woman
called Barbara Findesein on
what's called perinatal issues.
And it was based on
Stan Groff's work on--
>>REGINA: Stanley Groff?
Yes, and I interviewed
him many, many years ago
and went through
the workshop that--
>>OLAOIRE: Exactly.
Well, I went through
this workshop,
and the idea was that he
talked about this idea
of basic perinatal
matrices, which was a belief
system that there are four
critical stages to the birth
process.
I think the first may have been
the contractions as they begin.
The second is the
baby turning to engage
the head in the birth canal.
The third is squeezing
through the birth canal,
and the fourth is coming out,
I think, umbilical cord cut,
and all these bright lights.
And he claimed that adult
neurotic behavior correlates
very closely to the particular
period at which the child
experienced the most difficulty
during the birthing process.
So I'm expecting I'm
going to experience this.
And everybody in
the group, there
were 23 of us doing
this workshop,
everybody in the group
had the experience
of experiencing a difficulty
during their own birth process.
And I'm expecting the same
thing when it comes to my turn.
Instead, I had this experience
of being a young Tibetan
woman giving birth to
our firstborn child.
And it was so real, I literally
had pains in my thighs
for four or five
days afterwards.
And this totally rocked me,
because it was an experience.
And I know from
epistemology that
are three ways we know stuff.
The first one is an
authority figure tells us,
and we believe them.
The second one is we
experienced it for ourselves.
And the third one is we
figure stuff out on our own.
And so here was an
experience I could not doubt.
It was absolutely real.
And subsequently
through self-hypnosis
and through visionary
experiences,
I have recovered memories
from 11 other lifetimes.
And so I had no doubt whatsoever
that for a whole bunch
of reasons, psychological
reasons, theological reasons,
sociological reasons,
reincarnation
is probably the most
important element
in the trajectory of a soul
in its learning to grow,
because you can't
be prejudiced if you
subscribe to reincarnation.
And you realize that
whatever position I'm
in now as a white,
Irish male, I've
been in all of the
other configurations
in past lifetimes.
So to be prejudiced against
anybody in any configuration
is absolutely meaningless.
And the best way I know
to let go of prejudice
is to come to the realization--
I don't just--
I don't just kind of think, what
is it like to be that person,
to be female, or to be a
slave in Africa in the 1300s,
or to be a shaman in North
America in the 9th century,
but to have been in those
places and experienced life
from those places, I
can't be prejudiced
at this stage from
being Catholic, or being
Irish, or being male.
It doesn't make any sense.
So I don't know of any
other way that-- it
solves so many theological
problems, so many sociological
problems, so many
psychological problems,
and it does away completely
with prejudices of all kinds.
>>REGINA: I think that's why
I resonated so deeply when
I first heard some
of your homilies
online when another interviewee
he turned me onto you a while
back.
And he said, you've
got to meet this guy.
I think he would make
a great interview.
And then after we did our
first interview on my site,
I started hearing
from other people.
And they remembered you.
One lady said, I met him
in Lourdes in the '70s.
I never forgot him.
And everybody kept having
this impression of you
as this kind of exquisite
thinker, as a philosopher,
and as an inspiration.
So I've since been lucky enough
to have conversations with you
and find out more about
your thinking on this.
But this very part
of you that is
that open to ultimate truths.
This reincarnation thing,
we'll talk about a little
later, because it did get you
in trouble with the Church.
[LAUGHING]
And we've always
heard it bandied
about that reincarnation was
part of the original documents,
but was removed ostensibly for
reasons of maintaining power
over the people.
And when we go back
to epistemology,
we're talking about
from God on high
and learning from
authority figures.
And this takes us
right into your book.
>>OLAOIRE: Right.
>>REGINA: So let's start
going into "Setting God Free."
What made you decide
to write that?
And then, I'll just set it up.
You write it as a trial.
You're always on trial.
The God of the Old
Testament's on trial.
And you have some very
snappy figures in this.
And a couple of them
kind represent you
in the court case, mugging
it up for the jury,
trying to get laughs out of the
jury in doing their analysis.
It's very funny.
But it's very scholarly
at the same time.
So why did you decide to
write "Setting God Free"?
>>OLAOIRE: So I
began to see that,
as people read through the
Hebrew scriptures particularly,
and indeed some parts of
the New Testament even,
there are these what are
euphemistically called
"the difficult passages."
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>OLAOIRE: Difficult
as in genocidal maniac,
pathological liar,
covenant breaker, you know?
And you kind of skip over those.
And typically, on a
Sunday, the readings
that are presented
to the community
are a select group of
readings from the scriptures,
and they ignore or leave
out the other pieces.
And I began to see, how can
you just skip over these pieces
and not acknowledge that
this book, both the Hebrew
scriptures and the
Christian scriptures,
have been used to justify
all kinds of inquisitions,
all kinds of conquistadores,
all kinds of crusades,
all kinds of pogroms against
particularly the Jewish nation.
And I began to
realize, you know,
I'm going to have to go right
through this and find out,
is there a third explanation?
The first explanation is
this guy is a total maniac,
you know?
And there's no point
in believing in him.
And the second point is,
there is no God whatsoever.
So we're faced between a
choice between the devil
and the deep blue sea.
You either subscribe
to this God,
and you develop a fear-based
dogmatic religion,
or you cast this
God away and you
create a world of
atheism, meaninglessness,
that it came from nothing
and is going nowhere.
The soul is a mirage.
Consciousness is
simply an epiphenomenon
of biochemical activities
in the brain, you know,
and it's going nowhere
really quickly.
And so we're caught
between these two pieces.
And it reminded me of this,
the Stockholm syndrome.
It was an event that happened
in 1973 in Sweden, where
bank robbers took four
hostages, and they're
held hostage for several days.
And finally, the police
break in and set them free.
But when they're freed,
the hostages refuse
to give evidence
against the captors
because they have
somehow, to relieve
some form of
cognitive dissonance,
they had to align with the
belief systems of the captors.
But much more importantly,
I just found out,
the police were so brutal
in freeing these people,
the police seem to have little
interest in the captives
and all the interest in
capturing the criminals.
And so the captors have felt
so badly done by the police,
that they refused to give
evidence against their captors.
Now I see that we're
caught in the same bind.
We're either caught with a kind
of a fundamentalist, fear-based
theology that's afraid
to upset this God,
and so we cling on to him.
And the alternative is
to abandon this God,
and there's nothing
to replace it.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>OLAOIRE: There's this
atheism of meaninglessness
in our times.
And I began to feel, there must
be a third way through this.
It can't be just these
two alternatives.
So I decided, I was
going to through this,
I was going to
harvest this book.
And it was to call in experts--
Bible scholars, archaeologists,
psychologists, contract
lawyers, mythologists--
to try to find out,
is there a third
way of harvesting
this extraordinary
cache of material
to find out what it
really represents
and that it could
be inspirational
when it's done in this case.
So that was the
reason for the book.
>>REGINA: So you,
first of all, you just
have a little bit of it.
When we did our other
interview, I said,
people think you're saying
"guide" when you're saying God.
It's your Irish accent.
So you've been saying
God the whole time?
>>OLAOIRE: OK.
And source.
>>REGINA: I can hear
just-- yes, source.
That works.
Source, because that's the
other term that you use.
So what is your--
so, first of all,
start with, what is
your definition of God?
>>OLAOIRE: So when
I think about it,
I see this
extraordinary transition
since Homo sapiens
sapiens evolved, which
is about 70,000 years ago.
So we had hominids
for millions of years,
and then we had Homo
sapiens beginning
about 300,000 years
ago, but Homo sapiens
didn't have language.
Only 70,000 years ago,
Homo sapiens sapiens
developed language.
And language is the ability
to manipulate symbols
intracranially and give rise to
the spoken word that represents
the ideology of the mind.
So once we developed that,
the first use to which
we put it was storytelling.
And so I see there
were four eras in this.
We began to ask the
questions, who put us here?
Who's responsible for all this?
Where did we come from?
And where do we go when we
die, when we shuffle off
this mortal coil?
So the first era is, I call
the era of the theologians.
These were people who
began to try to figure out,
who are the gods?
It was always plural
at that stage.
Who are they?
Where do they reside?
What's their schtick?
So I would call it the
era of the theologians.
The second was the
era of the priests.
They now have figured out
some kind of a theology.
Now, they want a
relationship with these gods.
So they create prayer and
ritual of various kinds.
And that's the era
of the priests.
The third era is the
era of the prophets.
There are now
individual people who
purport to represent the
viewpoint of these gods
and to speak on behalf of
these gods to the nation.
They're prophets, so they
speak on behalf of the gods.
And the fourth one
are the mystics
who, they don't
speak about the gods,
and they're not
speaking to the gods,
and they're not speaking
on behalf of the gods.
They're speaking as God.
Because they realize
that ultimately,
there is only source.
I've said famously before
that everything that exists
is simply God in drag.
We are holographic
fractals of source.
And so source in the
isness, it is the part
that the mystics
realize, you can't even
speak about it because
it's an ineffable reality.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>OLAOIRE: You
can experience it.
>>REGINA: Incomprehensible.
>>OLAOIRE: Totally
incomprehensible
and inarticulatable.
You can experience it,
but you cannot articulate.
And so the ultimate position
is not even the mystic.
There's a fifth group,
and that's the non-
[NON-ENGLISH] mystic who
won't open her mouth at all,
and just experience what it is
and radiate the isness of God
through the way in which
she lives her life.
Yeah, so apart from that,
any descriptor of God
is going to have
to be parabolic,
in other words story
form, myth or parable,
in our storytelling.
That's the only way we can
engage with this experience
of the divine.
>>REGINA: Thank you for that.
So we have your understanding,
and we can go from there
as a platform.
So when you get into
the trial, is McDermott
the name of the chief
witness for the prosecution?
He's kind of like you, and he's
hamming it up for the jury,
not understanding.
The court's not
impressed that he's
trying to get laughter and
consensus from the jurors.
But basically, some of the
stories in the Old Testament
are so absurd, there
is no other track
you could take in handling this.
So you applied psychology,
mathematics, and such
to the scriptures.
So we're only going to be able
to grab a couple of pieces out
because of time constraints.
But let's just look at
Exodus, the story of Exodus,
for example.
>>OLAOIRE: Right.
So you take the story
of Exodus, for instance,
and purportedly, according
to the scriptures,
603,550 military Israelites
escaped from Egypt.
Now, if you think that there
are men between the ages of 20
and 60, perhaps--
So there are boys before
that and there are older men
after that.
And then there are all
the females in the group.
So you're talking about a group
of at least 2 million people
allegedly escaped from the
greatest empire of the day, who
controlled Egypt, who controlled
the entire Sinai Peninsula.
And they're wandering
the desert for 40 years
unbeknownst to these
Egyptians, and God
kills at the first
born of all Egyptians
to set the Israelites free.
Now I've calculated,
the mathematician in me.
If they were
socially distancing,
so there's 2 million
people escape from Egypt,
it's 263 miles from
Cairo to Jerusalem.
So if they're walking 10 abreast
and they're socially distancing
6 feet apart, the
first group is going
to be in Jerusalem before
the last group leaves home.
So that's the kind of--
>>REGINA: 100% It
wouldn't go unnoticed.
>>OLAOIRE: It
The Egyptian army-- and that
period of Egyptian history,
allegedly, this event took
place in the year 1250 BCE.
And after 40 years before they
enter the Promised Land in 1210
BCE, Egypt controlled all
the territory up to Turkey
in the North and
Mesopotamia in the East.
And somehow, the
2 million people
wandering around the
desert with their flocks
escaped their notice.
Now in the meantime, God is
so upset with these people
that, they're constantly
kvetching and complaining
about him, that he
decides that of all those
who leave Egypt,
only two people are
going to make it into the land
of Canaan, Caleb and Joshua.
So you've got 2 million bodies
scattered all over the Sinai
Peninsula.
Now in 1967, when the Israelis,
when four Arab nations attacked
Israel, and in six days
Israel defeated it,
and they recaptured
the Sinai Peninsula,
and a deluge of
Israeli archaeologists
descended on the Sinai to
find evidence of the Exodus,
and they went through
with a fine tooth comb,
they didn't find a single animal
bone or a single human bone.
And particularly
around Mount Sinai,
where they had encamped
allegedly for two years
and where Moses is
given the Covenant,
they camped there
for about two years,
there wasn't a single
bone of a donkey,
or a cow, a human being,
anywhere to be found.
And it wasn't that
it was so long ago,
they couldn't find the evidence.
They found evidence of
previous civilization,
previous nomadic pastoralists,
who passed through the area
because their equipment is
so sensitive at this stage.
And many of the towns which
allegedly the escapees
demolished in the
process, they didn't even
exist at that stage for
hundreds of years afterwards.
>>REGINA: So what
is the implication
to both Christian and Jewish
doctrine and the belief
systems?
>>OLAOIRE: And that is where
I brought in the mythologist.
This is the important
piece of it here.
They looked at the
defense, how do you
defend Yahweh in this instance?
The realization
was that you can't
understand the Bible until
you understand storytelling.
And the objective of
storytelling is threefold.
Stories allow you to survive
in the present moment,
no matter what the vicissitudes
that your experience.
It allows you to survive
the present circumstances.
It gives you an
explanation for the past.
So you either recall
past events or you even
make up past events.
And it gives you the hope that
you'll survive into the future.
So all the great storytellers,
they create origin myths.
We have it in Ireland, the
Tuatha D Danann of Ireland.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>OLAOIRE: Going back thousands
of years before the Celts,
our creation myth.
So we create creation myths.
The Big Bang is a creation
myth that science has created.
I don't believe for a
moment in the Big Bang.
The Big Bang was a
song God made clapping,
and she gave birth
to the cosmos.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>OLAOIRE: That's
what the Big Bang is.
And we'll find that
out at some stage.
So we have to create
stories that give us
a sense of where we came from.
And we have to create
great heroes and heroines
to give us inspiration
that we can
survive present difficulties.
So the myth of the
exodus is actually
fashioned during a real
period in Hebrew history
from 589 BC to 539 BC, when
the last two tribes of Israel
are in exile in Babylon.
Babylon has overcome the
great Assyrian Empire,
which had demolished the 10
Northern tribes of Israel
in the year 721 BCE.
There are only two tribes
left, Benjamin and Judah.
And now it looks like they're
going to be demolished as well.
So at this stage,
they pull together
all the stories they've had
from the Northern kingdom
and the Southern
kingdom, in which
God has given different names.
In the South, he's called
Yahweh, [NON-ENGLISH]..
In the North, he's called
Elohim, and Elohim is a plural.
It means the powerful ones.
It's not even a singular noun.
They bring together
all these stories,
and they combine them
into what will then
be called the Pentateuch, which
is Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers, and Deuteronomy.
And they will invent a
character called Moses.
They need a liberator,
and Moses is probably
the most important liberator
that never existed.
He has influenced more people
to strive for their freedom
than any character in history.
And that's the
purpose of the story.
It's not about factual history.
It's about creating a
hero who can help them
in present
difficulties to survive
what they're going through.
And they create this myth
of an exodus from Egypt
that allegedly happened
between 1250 BCE and 1210 BC,
and they're creating
it in 539 BCE.
And at this stage,
Osiris the Great,
who is the emperor of Persia,
has overthrown the Babylonians
and is setting the
Israelites free to go back
into the land of Israel.
Well, in actual fact,
only 50,000 went back.
Most of them opted
to stay in Babylon.
But now they're
facing a real exodus,
and they're going
to have to go back,
to have to rebuild
the temple, which was destroyed
by Nebuchadnezzar in 589 BCE.
And so, they will have
to start from scratch.
So they're going to
need a real exodus,
so they invent this
exodus story for Moses,
and it gives them the
courage and the inspiration
to do what they did.
And now 2,500 years later, their
people are still flourishing.
>>REGINA: That makes sense.
There's like, songs of war,
to be able to bond together
and find your purpose and move
forward into a challenging
circumstance.
So it makes perfect sense.
The other part of this,
too, is the Egyptians
were known to be
meticulous record keepers.
So all of these events, having
their firstborn sons slain,
all of this would have shown up
somewhere in Egyptian records.
Because they did keep record,
and a lot of those still exist.
There is no mention
of any of this.
So the exodus is a fabrication
to help people much later,
700 years or so down the line,
contend with an actual movement
back toward their land, right?
>>OLAOIRE: Very important.
>>REGINA: OK.
Right.
That's good.
OK, thank you.
And along these
journeys in these books,
massive amount of sacrifice,
bloodshed, hardship, horrible,
horrible acts of a
mean and angry God.
So let's talk about that,
because as you get further
into the book, and I encourage
everyone to read this book,
it lays waste to, taking
on a dogmatic fashion, any
of these texts any longer.
Because what you're
doing is pointing
a way towards
something much more
gracious and kind and
compelling in the end,
which is starting a new way of
seeing spirit, beyond religion.
So that's where it's headed.
Meanwhile, as you're
deconstructing all of this,
talk a little bit about the
bloodshed, the bloodthirst
of the gods, and what
you feel that was
depicting of the human shadow.
>>OLAOIRE: And so
in the book itself,
I divided this kind of
pathological genocidal
divinity.
I looked at individual murders
for which he was responsible,
and then mass murders of his own
people, and then mass murders
of other people, and then
even genocidal efforts.
And so again and
again and again,
he's killing individuals
among his chosen people
for some kind of a
failure to keep his law.
So, for instance, he's asked
Moses to go back into Egypt
to set his people free.
And on the way back,
Moses is married
to a non-Jewish woman at the
time, and he has two sons.
And God attempts to kill
Moses on the way back to Egypt
because he hasn't
circumcised her sons.
Now the fact is,
circumcision didn't
arrive for hundreds
of years after Moses'
putative existence.
And so his wife, a woman called
Zipporah, has to take a knife
and circumcise the
two boys on the spot
to save God from killing Moses.
>>REGINA: OK.
Don't get us into that one.
[LAUGHING]
Circumcision, what
was that about
and why was that carried over
into the Christian world?
And why does this
persist to this day?
>>OLAOIRE: I joke sometimes
that it's an amazing thing
that people were
prepared to trade,
that God was prepared to trade
a covenant for foreskins.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>OLAOIRE: What kind of a
fetish he had, I have no idea.
>>REGINA: I mean,
what was the point?
I just don't get this still.
I never have.
>>OLAOIRE: Obviously,
circumcision
came at a much later
stage in human development
and was practiced
actually by the peoples
among whom I lived as well.
So for whatever reasons,
it came out of--
>>REGINA: In Kenya?
>>OLAOIRE: Oh, yeah.
Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
So what was the purpose there?
>>OLAOIRE: It was
an initiation rite.
So it happened for boys at
the beginning of puberty.
And it was a trial
that they could
endure that kind of physical
assault without crying out.
And so it was basically
many, many different peoples
throughout human history have
put young boys, particularly,
in situations of being
in danger of dying
to prove their kind of their
virility and their strength,
that they wouldn't cry.
And so this was one such custom.
Now that's kind of
retroactively put back--
>>REGINA: To do it to
a two-day-old baby?
Tender little baby?
>>OLAOIRE: Yes, and to pretend
that it doesn't hurt the child.
It's utterly ridiculous.
But initially, it was
a rite of initiation,
and it's still practiced
in Kenya as such.
Young boys at age 12 or 13 are
taken off for a few months,
and they're inducted
into warriorhood,
and they undergo this
trial to see if they
are fit for being warriors.
Yeah.
But that was just one instance.
God kills 3,000
people for dancing
naked around a golden
calf after Moses
is locked on the mountain for
40 days to get the Covenant.
At one stage, God kills
the two sons of Aaron.
They're newly ordained priests.
And on their first day as being
priests, they mess up a ritual
and God kills the two of them.
And Aaron, the father,
and God says to him,
don't cry, and don't
touch those dead bodies.
I'll kill you as well.
>>REGINA: And people
were still trying
to get in his good favor.
>>OLAOIRE: Exactly.
There's one passage
in the Second book
of Chronicles in Chapter 14.
Ridiculous story,
that God allegedly
killed 1 million Ethiopians.
I don't know what misdemeanor.
He killed 1 million Ethiopians.
>>REGINA: It is laughable.
>>OLAOIRE: Yeah, totally.
>>REGINA: And so the way that
the prosecution reduces it
through their star
witness is hysterical.
I just have to say,
it's hysterical,
as he counts this all up, right?
And that's based
on your personality
and your storytelling.
Now as we get on in the
book I don't want to-- we
can't go into too many
of these, because there's
a lot of-- there are
a lot of examples,
scholarship, units
of measurement.
Noah's Ark is very interesting.
You said it gives a whole
new meaning to poop deck.
[LAUGHING]
Noah's Ark itself.
Although we know
there was a deluge.
And so let's go on now to
what you were trying to--
what you're trying
to move past and move
toward in the latter
part of the book.
And I want to read a
couple of things you said.
So now we get into--
not even the New Testament.
We're getting into
Yeshua or Jesus.
You say personally,
I don't believe
that Jesus was a
Christian, nor did he
come to found a new religion.
Rather he came to
fan into flames,
the mystical embers that lie
at the heart of each one of us.
And that's really
what you're doing.
>>OLAOIRE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: In your
lifetime as well.
>>OLAOIRE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: So you say in a
very well-articulated way that
religion as we know
it really now--
you as a Catholic priest say,
we need to get rid of it.
>>OLAOIRE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And let's
start talking about what
you're building toward.
And then let me read one
more of your statements.
>>OLAOIRE: Sure.
>>REGINA: OK.
This is what you said.
"To avoid the ages old cycle.
And this is the ages-old cycle.
Someone has a
spiritual experience.
A charismatic prophet
then shows up.
Then we develop community.
Then there's the
death of the prophet.
Then organizations
and oligarchy.
Then theology, dogma, crusades
against any outsiders,
inquisitions against insiders,
and voila, a new prophet."
>>OLAOIRE: Yes.
>>REGINA: And that's how the
cycle has gone historically.
>>OLAOIRE: Yes.
>>REGINA: Just talk
about that for a moment
and why we've got
to let this go.
>>OLAOIRE: So I've seen this.
This is true not just of
religions, and certainly not
just of the Christian religion.
I've seen it in
all organizations,
that what starts off as
an extraordinary insight,
as a way of reaching out to
help suffering humanity, very,
very quickly--
you know, it's built
around some kind
of a charismatic individual
who attracts, you know,
followers of some kind.
And almost inevitably,
he's killed,
a Martin Luther King
figure or a Mahatma Gandhi
figure or a Jesus figure.
They're killed.
Then, there is an
organization grows up
around the memory
of this individual.
The organization is
taken over by some kind
of a self-appointed oligarchy,
who now put themselves
in charge.
They now begin very, very
slowly to change the teaching.
It's like, the
original prophet said,
we need to march
towards the East.
The next guy says, well, he
didn't actually mean the East.
He meant the North, Northeast.
So let's shift a little bit.
That's what he actually meant.
The next guy comes
and along and says,
he didn't actually
mean North Northeast.
He meant North, so
we shift to North.
The next guy says,
well, actually, he
was talking actually
about going Northwest.
That's really what
he was talking about.
And the guy the next day
says, actually, there
was a miscalculation.
He meant West.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>OLAOIRE: And then we're
180 degrees out of it.
And that's what happens
in organizations.
And it happens in every
organization of human beings.
It goes through these stages.
And some new prophet
arises to call us back,
like a Francis of Assisi
in the 1200s, who's
calling the
Christian church back
into the message and the
vision of Jesus Christ.
And within 200 years,
the group that he founds,
the Franciscans, are in
charge of the Inquisition.
They're pulling people apart,
literally, on the rack.
And so again and
again, and I see
this tendency of human beings
to have great movements
shredded by organizations.
So if you want the--
for that I can say something
else about that if you wish.
>>REGINA: Please go ahead.
We have a few
minutes left, and I
wanted to get to you about
the subject of temptation
and perfection.
>>OLAOIRE: Sure.
One of the things I did in
Kenya was I lived in an area
where there was constant
famine, a semi-desert area.
And so water production
was a huge issue for me.
I spent a lot of time
creating water projects
to bring water to villages.
And mostly very successfully.
But on two occasions, I
remember, one occasion,
we piped water over a
two-year project from a source
to a village.
And we turned on the
water in the village
square in the morning
two years into the work,
and nothing comes out.
And we go back along the pipe.
It's just PVC piping,
plastic piping.
And a warrior from
a different tribe
who didn't get a
water project had just
traversed the pipe with a
spear, sticking holes in it
all the ways, and the
water just spouting out.
And so in the second project,
we had piped water successfully,
and we turned on the water.
It flowed copiously.
Everybody drank from it.
And two days later, everybody
was down with dysentery,
because the source from which
we were taking the water
was polluted.
And that became a
great image for me,
that the pipes represent
the systems as we create,
and the water represents the
people who staff the systems.
If you've got good systems
with corrupt people,
you're going to
poison the consumer.
If you've got bad
systems with good people,
the consumer-- the
product doesn't even
reach the consumer.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>OLAOIRE: So it has to
be both a good structure
and good people.
So there has to be a commitment
on behalf of the people
to transform themselves
as individuals
and to create systems that
reflect that transformation.
But you can't have
one and not the other.
Otherwise, they'll just
corrupt each other.
>>REGINA: You're right.
>>OLAOIRE: And so
whether we're talking
about revamping
our medical models,
or our educational systems,
or our religious systems,
it needs to be both a commitment
on the part of the individuals
to self-transformation
and a commitment
to transform the
systems that deliver
the commodity to the consumer.
>>REGINA: And I think
it's fair to say globally,
we're in desperate
need of both sides
to transform in all of the
ways you just spoke of.
You wrote something,
and I wanted
to talk to you about this.
And it's a kind
of a non-sequitur,
but we only have a
few minutes left,
and you and I are going to have
more conversations, including
a series of conversations about
the nature of good and evil
in the very truest
sense of the word,
which I can't wait for that.
Meanwhile, you have here, we're
going to talk about temptation.
"Without temptation,
we would be robots,
pre-programmed to be good.
One who is unconsciously
good is simply lucky.
evil is simply asleep.
One who is consciously
evil is pathological,
and one who is consciously
good is enlightened,"
which is an entirely new
definition of enlightenment,
thinking we're going
to somehow transcend
into another dimension,
and we'll just
be gossamer in appearance.
That's not what it's about.
So let's talk about this, and
our, especially in New Age
communities, this seeking
perfection isn't--
I don't think it's
even the right journey,
to seek perfection.
I would like you
to talk about it.
>>OLAOIRE: So the
word perfection,
Jesus says in the New
Testament, he says,
you must be perfect as your
Heavenly Father is perfect.
And I thought, what
does that mean?
And the New Testament
is written in Greek.
And the word that
used for perfection
is the word telos, from which we
get the English word theology.
And theology means to be
attracted toward a goal.
That's what it means.
So perfection consists
in being committed
to the purpose for
which I incarnated.
It has nothing got to do with
a stainless steel sinlessness.
Nada to do with that.
So it's very related then to
the world of sin, for instance.
Again in the New
Testament, the word sin
is a metaphor that's
taken from archery.
It means literally
just to miss the mark.
Now, missing the mark
is hugely important
because the essence
of learning is
repetition and feedback,
the two aspects, repetition
and feedback.
You learn things by hearing
it again and again and again.
You learn to ride a bicycle
by doing it again and again
and again, and you
improve your performance
by the feedback from
your previous efforts.
So if you're playing
darts, for instance,
if you go to an English pub,
and they're throwing darts
at a dartboard, and I were to
hang a sheet across the middle
of the room and say, you have to
throw the darts over the sheet,
and you can't actually
see the dart board.
And now know you're
throwing darts,
and you have no idea
where they land.
There is no way you
can improve your aim.
Because when you
throw a dart, you say,
oh I'm throwing too far
to the left or too high.
I can adjust my aim.
So sin is the system whereby
we are given feedback
from our previous efforts
to improve our aim.
So perfection is being
committed to improving
my aim by doing better each
time I see where my dart lands.
So both sin and perfection
are misunderstood completely
in the Christian scriptures.
It's a feedback
mechanism in which
the soul is committed to
picking itself up again
and again and again.
We're like an acorn.
An acorn is
committed to becoming
an oak tree capable of
dropping acorns itself.
And that process takes
an acorn 50 years.
It is 50 years
before an acorn can
become an oak tree capable
of dropping other acorns,
but it's committed
to that process.
And no matter where
you put an acorn,
it will try its best
to send on a root
and create a tree that
will produce acorns.
That's what perfection
means, to be an acorn.
>>REGINA: I love that.
And that makes perfect
sense to me, is continuing.
Don't let anything get in your
way of continuing on the path
that you've chosen for
yourself in this lifetime.
The lessons you've chosen,
the love you've chosen,
the people and the
character, cast
of characters you've chosen.
Just keep trying.
And like you say in
this previous one,
that new definition of
enlightenment, the one who
is consciously good, meaning
you're working at it,
is enlightened.
>>OLAOIRE: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: That is enlightenment.
I love that.
>>OLAOIRE: Thanks.
>>REGINA: It's very
human, it's very us,
and it's very achievable.
And finally, I want
to read this one other
you wrote as a teaser.
This whole subject that we're
going to be talking about,
the nature of good
and evil, we get
the subject of free will
as humans into this.
>>OLAOIRE: Yes, yes, yes.
>>REGINA: So let me read this
and have you respond to it, OK?
You wrote, this is page 276,
"free will is the sticky part.
It necessitates there being
choices among which to decide.
But the choice
originally was not
between good and
pre-existing evil,
rather, where to land on
the spectrum of service
to self at one end and service
to other on the other."
That is the most
perfect definition
I've seen about the
implications of free will.
>>OLAOIRE: Thank you.
>>REGINA: So there you go.
And when we look at all
of these various conflicts
and these stories in the Bible
and so forth, a lot of it,
it really falls down to, was
this done for service to self
or was this done for
service to other?
So any final thoughts
now on the book and what
you're trying to do with it?
I know people have started
trying to get in touch with you
from around the
world about, how do
we set up truly conscious
groups of people
to move forward together?
>>OLAOIRE: It's a
great question, Regina.
Because that's where
the future lies.
The future is not going
to be megachurches.
The future is not going to be
handouts from the government.
The future is not
going to be kind
of jabs that protect us from all
kinds of COVID in the future.
The future is small communities
working together, sharing
their skills and
their resources,
and then networking
internationally
with each other.
The time of the mega
groupings, the time
of the WHO making
health decisions,
or the International
Monetary Fund
making financial
decisions, or the Vatican
making religious decisions,
that's long since gone.
It's no longer
serving its purposes.
We're on the verge of a
breakthrough, in which we
realize that we have to
disidentify with what I call
the "role self," which is
just the place I'm playing
in this incarnation, and
re-identify with the soul
self, which is the eternal part
of me, which was never born
and which will never
die until finally I
emerge with the source self.
Because ultimately,
you know, life
is a game that God is playing.
I sometimes say that life is a
dream that the ego is having.
And the ego is a dream
that the soul is having.
And the soul is a dream
that spirit is having,
and spirit is a dream
that source is having.
So we live within nested dreams,
and it's God dreaming this.
>>REGINA: Yes, that's beautiful.
Well, you said one thing
that got my attention,
but we don't have
time to talk about it.
And that is-- well, many things.
But we were talking about
where we come together
as individuals, offering our
unique talents and skills.
One of the things
I'm concerned about
is right now, we've
become so technological
that the young people
coming up are plenty bright,
but they're not having
to be forced away
into developing skill sets.
So there seems to
be a lack of skills
that are developing
in the youngest
generation, the
Zoomers right now,
where you might
have known how to do
many things by the age
of 10 once upon a time.
So somehow, I think
the technology is also
part of this block to
our being able to develop
these kinds of communities
you're talking about,
even though it also assists us.
>>OLAOIRE: You're
absolutely right.
>>REGINA: We'll talk about
that in the next conversation.
How's that?
Sean, thank you so much.
>>OLAOIRE: Thank
you so much, Regina.
>>REGINA: I could just
listen to you all day.
I love your innate
and learned wisdom.
>>OLAOIRE: I'm Irish.
I can talk all day.
>>REGINA: Oh, you can.
I love it.
[LAUGHING]
Until next time.
You can connect with
Sean and his work,
including his live
stream masses on Sundays,
which you've heard a little
bit about what these are like.
Not your usual mass.
And his books on
spiritsinspacesuits.com.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]